Table of contents






Key facts
A healthy diet helps protect against malnutrition and
diet-related noncommunicable diseases such as
diabetes, heart disease, stroke and cancer.
Adopt healthy dietary practices:

• balance calories in with calories out
• limit fat intake
• shift from saturated to unsaturated fats
• eliminate industrially-produced trans fats
• limit sugars and salt intake
BEAT MALNUTRITION AND
NONCOMMUNICABLE DISEASES
A healthy diet helps protect against
malnutrition in all its forms, as well
as diet-related noncommunicable
diseases, including diabetes, heart
disease, stroke and cancer.

GLOBAL RISKS
Unhealthy diet and lack of physical
activity are leading global risks to
health.

START EARLY IN LIFE
Healthy dietary practices start early
in life – breastfeeding fosters healthy
growth and improves cognitive
development, and may have longerterm health benefits like reducing the
risk of becoming overweight or obese
and developing noncommunicable
diseases later in life.



BALANCE CALORIES
Energy intake (calories) should be in
balance with energy expenditure.

LIMIT FAT INTAKE
Evidence indicates that total fat should
not exceed 30% of total energy intake
to avoid unhealthy weight gain (1,2,3),
with a shift in fat consumption away
from saturated fats to unsaturated
fats (3), and towards the elimination of
industrially-produced trans fats (4).

LIMIT SUGAR INTAKE
Limiting intake of free sugars to
less than 10% of total energy intake
(2,5) is part of a healthy diet. A
further reduction to less than 5% of
total energy intake is suggested for
additional health benefits (5).

LIMIT SALT INTAKE
Keeping salt intake to less than 5 g per
day helps prevent hypertension and
reduces the risk of heart disease and
stroke in the adult population (6).


Healthy diet
for adults
Fruits, vegetables, legumes,
nuts, whole grains.

10

5

portions

Eat fruits, vegetables, legumes (e.g. lentils,
beans), nuts and whole grains (e.g. unprocessed
maize, millet, oats, wheat, brown rice) every
day. The recommended daily intake for an adult
includes: 2 cups of fruit (4 servings), 2.5 cups of
vegetables (5 servings), 180 g of grains, and 160 g of
meat and beans. Red meat can be eaten 1−2 times
per week, and poultry 2−3 times per week.
Eat at least 5 portions of fruit and vegetables a
day (at least 400 g) (2). Potatoes, sweet potatoes,
cassava and other starchy roots are not classified
as fruit or vegetables.

max

12

Limit total energy intake from free sugars to
around 12 level teaspoons (which is equivalent
to 50 g), but ideally less than 5% of total energy
intake for additional health benefits (5). Most
free sugars are added to foods or drinks by the
manufacturer, cook or consumer, and can also be
found in sugars naturally present in honey, syrups,
fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates.
Limit total energy intake from fats to less than
30% (1,2,3). Unsaturated fats (e.g. found in fish,
avocado, nuts, sunflower, canola and olive oils)
are preferable to saturated fats (e.g. found in fatty
meat, butter, palm and coconut oil, cream, cheese,
ghee and lard) (3). Industrially-produced trans fats
(found in processed food, fast food, snack food,
fried food, frozen pizza, pies, cookies, margarines
and spreads) are not part of a healthy diet.
Limit salt to less than 5 g per day (equivalent to
approximately 1 teaspoon) (6) and use iodized
salt.

11

Healthy diet
for infants and
young children

12

In the first 2 years of a child’s life, optimal nutrition fosters healthy growth
and improves cognitive development. It also reduces the risk of becoming
overweight or obese and developing noncommunicable diseases later in life.
Advice on a healthy diet for infants and children is similar to that for adults,
but the following elements are unique to infants and children.

Infants should be breastfed
exclusively during the first 6
months of life.
Infants should be breastfed
continuously until 2 years of age
and beyond.
From 6 months of age, breast
milk should be complemented
with a variety of adequate,
safe and nutrient-dense
complementary foods. Salt and
sugars should not be added to
complementary foods.

13

Practical advice
on maintaining
a healthy diet
Fruits and
vegetables
Eating at least 400 g, or 5
portions, of fruits and vegetables
per day reduces the risk of
noncommunicable diseases (2), and
helps ensure an adequate daily intake
of dietary fibre.
To improve your fruit and vegetable
consumption you can:
• always include vegetables in your meals
• eat fresh fruits and raw vegetables as
snacks
• eat fresh fruits and vegetables in season
• eat a variety of choices of fruits and
vegetables.

Fats

Reducing the amount of total fat
intake to less than 30% of total
energy intake helps prevent
unhealthy weight gain in the
adult population (1,2,3).
Also, the risk of developing
noncommunicable diseases is
lowered by reducing saturated fats to
less than 10% of total energy intake, and
total trans fats to less than 1% of total
energy intake, and replacing both with
unsaturated fats (2,3).

14

Fats intake can be reduced by:
• changing how you cook – remove the
fatty part of meat; use vegetable oil
(not animal oil); and boil, steam or bake
rather than fry
• avoiding processed foods containing
trans fats
• limiting the consumption of foods
containing high amounts of saturated
fats (e.g. cheese, ice cream, fatty meat).

Salt, sodium and
potassium
Most people
consume too much
sodium through salt
(corresponding to
an average of 9–12 g of
salt per day) and not enough
potassium. High salt consumption and
insufficient potassium intake (less than
3.5 g) contribute to high blood pressure,
which in turn increases the risk of heart
disease and stroke (6,10).
1.7 million deaths could be prevented each
year if people’s salt consumption were
reduced to the recommended level of less
than 5 g per day (11).
People are often unaware of the amount
of salt they consume. In many countries,
most salt comes from processed foods
(e.g. ready meals; processed meats like
bacon, ham and salami; cheese and salty
snacks) or from food consumed frequently
in large amounts (e.g. bread). Salt is also
added to food during cooking (e.g. bouillon,
stock cubes, soy sauce and fish sauce) or
at the table (e.g. table salt).
You can reduce salt consumption by:

Some food manufacturers are
reformulating recipes to reduce the salt
content of their products, and it is helpful
to check food labels to see how much
sodium is in a product before purchasing
or consuming it.
Potassium, which can mitigate the
negative effects of elevated sodium
consumption on blood pressure, can be
increased through consumption of fresh
fruits and vegetables.

Sugars
The intake of free sugars should be reduced throughout the lifecourse (5). Evidence indicates 
that in both adults and children,
the intake of free sugars should
be reduced to less than 10% of
total energy intake (2,5), and that a
reduction to less than 5% of total energy
intake provides additional health benefits
(5). Free sugars are all sugars added to
foods or drinks by the manufacturer, cook
or consumer, as well as sugars naturally
present in honey, syrups, fruit juices and
fruit juice concentrates.
Consuming free sugars increases the
risk of dental caries (tooth decay). Excess
calories from foods and drinks high in
free sugars also contribute to unhealthy
weight gain, which can lead to overweight
and obesity.
Sugar intake can be reduced by:
• limiting the consumption of foods
and drinks containing high amounts
of sugars (e.g. sugar-sweetened
beverages, sugary snacks and candies)
• eating fresh fruits and raw vegetables
as snacks instead of sugary snacks.

• not adding salt, soy sauce or fish sauce
during the preparation of food
• not having salt on the table
• limiting the consumption of salty snacks
• choosing products with lower sodium
content.


How to promote
healthy diet

Diet evolves over time, being influenced by
many factors and complex interactions. Income,
food prices (which will affect the availability
and affordability of healthy foods), individual
preferences and beliefs, cultural traditions,
as well as geographical, environmental,
social and economic factors all interact in a
complex manner to shape individual dietary
patterns. Therefore, promoting a healthy food
environment, which promotes a diversified,
balanced and healthy diet, requires involvement
across multiple sectors and stakeholders,
including government and the private sector,
while safeguarding public health against vested
interests.
Governments have a central role in creating a
healthy food environment that enables people to
adopt and maintain healthy dietary practices.





You are a health assistant. Only respond to questions related to health, diet, nutrients, or allergies. If the user's query is not related to these topics, reply with: 'You should ask me about your health.